so this book blueprint the evolutionary
origins of a good society when did you
start this about nine or ten years ago
hmm and I at the time in my lab we were
doing research on friendship we were
doing research on on why people have
friends
it's actually it's not it's not
difficult to provide an account for why
we have sex with each other
many animals most animals are well I
don't know if it's most but animals
either reproduce sexually or a sexually
and most animals I try to remember now
what the relative proportions anyway
Obama say most most animals reproduce
sexually and it's not hard to provide an
account for how for why we why sex
originated why we reproduce sexually
it's not hard to provide an account for
why we are choosy in our mates or why we
are careful in who we have sex with but
human beings don't just mate with each
other we befriend each other we form
long-term non reproductive unions to
other individuals to whom we're not
related
why that's very rare in the animal
kingdom
very few creatures do this we do it
certain other primates elephants certain
whales and that's mostly it so the
question is why so I became very
interested in my lab and trying to
understand the deep origins of
friendship why would natural selection
have equipped us with this capacity and
that's at the stage then for and
exploring all kinds of other things in
our lives like why we love each other
for example why do we why do we when we
have sex with a person we tend to become
attached to them we develop emotional
sentiment about them that's not an
essential to having sex yet we do that
and then I became interested in other
kinds of good things like not as just
love and friendship but cooperation and
teaching teaching is another crazy thing
we take it for granted that we teach
each other but think about this most
animals are able to learn so a little
fish in the ocean learns that if it
swims to the light it finds more food
there so the fish then learns to be
tropic to move towards the light and
that's individual learning some animals
develop what's called social learning
social learning is really
so if I put my hand in the fire I
learned that I burned myself I pull my
hand out I've learned something I paid a
price and I learned something I could
observe you putting your hand in the
fire you pay all the price but I gain
most of the knowledge it's almost as
good I learn all people you shouldn't
put your hand in the fire saw the Jo
movies and in the fire so social
learning is super efficient learning
from others but we take it to an even
further level we don't just passively
observe other other animals of our own
species and learn from them we teach
each other that is very rare in the
animal kingdom where one animal sets out
to teach another animal something so the
book is it is is uh is about the
evolutionary origins of a good society
it's also a kind of response a kind of
push back to a long tradition in the
sciences of attention to the bad parts
of our nature you know the scientists in
my view have for too long been looking
at the origins of murder and tribalism
and selfishness and mendacity but but I
think the bright side has been denied
the attention it deserves because we
have also evolved to love and to
befriend each other and to be kind to
each other and to cooperate and to teach
each other all these good things and
I'll shut up please don't no and and
here's the thing here's this sort of one
way to think about this this must have
been the case that the benefits of a
connected life outweighed the costs we
would not be living socially if my
exposure to you harmed me unmet in other
words if I came near you and you were
violent to me you killed me or you gave
me misinformation you told me lies about
the world then my connection to you
would ultimately harm me that I should
be better off living as an isolated
animal so animals that come together to
live socially the benefits of that must
outweigh the costs my living us living
as a group so all this attention to the
ways in which our interactions are bad
that we kill each other that we steal
from each other that we lie to each
other that we have tribalism and all of
these traits which we do
every century's replete with horrors I'm
not like Pangloss like I don't think
like you know Pollyanna like Oh
everything's great That's not me
but what is me is a kind of optimistic
focus on the good parts of our of human
nature and the recognition that those
good parts must in toto overwhelm the
bad parts well they certainly have -
there's so many human beings I mean yeah
is that this is working yes we have
propagated where everywhere on every
single patch of land that's occupiable
in fact you're exactly right in the
argument and that's discussed in the
book the way we have achieved the kind
of social conquest of the earth the way
our species is is as spread out to
occupy every niche which is also very
rare most animals live in one you know
Grizzlies live in in this part of the
world they don't live in Amazonia and
you know polar bears live in this part
of the world they don't live in in
Arizona etc so so but our species lives
everywhere and the way we have come to
be able to do that is by the capacity to
have culture to teach and learn from
each other to accumulate knowledge so in
the book I talk about lots of this a
famous set of stories called the lost
European explorer files about how
European explorers are lost they lose
their supplies they wind up dying and
but they're in an environment in which
other people thrive and survive because
they have learned to how to live there
so we've spread out around the world and
then though there's a chapter in the
book at the beginning about shipwrecks
so so I have this should I go on chap
yeah so I have this I have this so what
I'd like to do is what I try to set out
to do in the beginning of the book as I
say look it's clear that our genes shape
the structure and function of our bodies
it is increasingly clear that our genes
also straight shape the structure and
function of our minds our behaviors
whether you're risk averse how
intelligent you are whether you have
wanderlust these properties are
properties that depend in part on your
gene
but it's also clear to me and that's
what the book argues is that our genes
shape not just a structure and function
of our bodies not just a structure and
function of our minds but also the
structure and function of our societies
and to really prove that what we would
need is something known as the forbidden
experiment and the forbidden experiment
is an experiment in which we took a
group of babies who had never been
taught anything who are a cultural had
no culture and stranded them on an
island and left them on their own to see
what kind of society they would make
when they grew up you know how would
they organize themselves socially is
there kind of an innate society that
human beings are are pre-wired to make
in an essence now obviously that's
unethical and cruel but actually
monarchs for thousands of years have
contemplated this experiment so
Herodotus writes in about how one of the
ancient Egyptian pharaohs wanted to know
what kind of language would what was a
natural language we had in us that we
would speak if we were not taught a
language so this Pharaoh it is said took
two babies and gave them to a mute
Shepherd to raise to see how did the
children speak when they grew up and and
and and the Emperor Akbar attempted this
there was a couple of European kings
that attempted this obviously we can't
actually do this so what I do in the
book is I look at a series of other
approximations of that and one chapter
is devoted to looking at shipwrecks
groups of men typically but sometimes
men and women who between 1500 and 1900
there were 9,000 shipwrecks many more
thousands of ships were lost at sea and
in 20 of those cases we found 20 cases
where at least 19 people were stranded
for at least two months and you know
here's that there's a kind of um here's
a map of the well here's one crew I can
tell you about but here's a map of the
of the shipwrecks like these are that oh
wow that all over the world where they
occurred and when they occurred and how
many people there were and and so then I
got all the original accounts from the
sailors from the people on the wrecks
and all contemporary archaeological
excavations of those wrecks were where
they had been excavated and and try to
understand what kind of
Society did these isolated crews
actually wind up making and there were
some amazing stories that were that I
found in there so they stayed for at
least two months how many of them
actually established a real civilization
well they didn't forever
no no one was stuck forever most of
those crews were eventually in fact all
of those crews had at least one survivor
because if they had all died then I
wouldn't be able to know about there's a
one famous case in which these sailors
were stranded in near Australia I think
somewhere in the Pacific and they
managed to catch a big petrol one of
those huge birds that you know like the
Condor and and they they they put a
little note in a little tiny bottle and
they tied it to its feet and this petrol
flew thousands of miles and landed in
Australia and was found with a note
indicating where the ice stranded
sailors were well and a ship was sent to
go find the men and it got there but
they had all died they were all done so
they use this this this bird so she ate
the bird well no they didn't eat the
bird they pushed enough no I think if
you had that choice you would
communicate rather than eat Joe I think
yes yeah for a little bit yes yes but
they starve to death then we don't know
nobody knows but the point is that we
have to have it for me to be able to
describe what happened we needed at
least one survivor
I know often there were many cases where
everyone survived I mean there was one
pair of cases that I was amazing to me
in 1846 in South Auckland islands just
north of Antarctica south of New Zealand
the the Grafton was wrecked on the
southern part of the island the camera
brought Big Island was it's in the book
I maybe let's say 90 miles long or
something or 20 miles long it he's 20
miles long on the southern part of the
island five men are wrecked on the
Grafton and on the northern part of the
island the invar Co Rex 19 men are
wrecked on the invar Co all the Grafton
crew survives the in both people both
crews were on the island at the same
time they never encountered each other
there's
rongling for survival it's like an like
an experiment like who's gonna win
tempted to say Fear Factor yeah and and
and the question is who's gonna survive
and how and why everyone on the Grafton
Cruise survives and 16 of the 19 men on
the on the invar Co crew die
there's also cannibalism and that crew
so it's a it's a very it's a very
different outcome for various reasons so
anyway so the point is that in the book
I start with a series of stories about
how people come together to make attempt
to make new civilizations I use the
example of unintentional communities
with with shipwrecks I have I looked at
it intentional communities like communes
and and kibbutz is in Israel and 1970s
communes in the United States and 19th
century communes in the United States
actually going back to Roman times there
have always been groups of people who
said societies fucked up I'm gonna go
and we're gonna make it again you know
we're gonna start afresh
I look at settlements in Antarctica of
scientists I look at the Pitcairn you
know the mutiny on the bounty I look at
the Shackleton expedition many many
cases of stranded isolated groups of
people trying to make a new social order
and then I also use data from
experiments we do in my lab we have this
software where tens of thousands of
people have come and played these games
we we can create these temporary
artificial societies of real people
where people come and spend an hour or
two and we with this godlike way can
engineer the society we can have a lot
of inequality or little inequality or
various other features and then we can
observe what happens and I look at all
of that data all those stories and say
look there is a deep and fundamental way
that no matter what human beings make a
society their underlying fundamental
principles about society which are as
innate as the fact that you have two
kidneys you know most people almost
everyone or your pancreas makes insulin
but they're very different all
throughout the world right I mean
there's totalitarian society
no-no-no so here's the point no yes so
here's what here's the argument you look
around the world and the way the example
I give is that yes there's huge cultural
variation around the world just like you
said to tell terian societies there's
people have different foods and they
have different ways of dressing and
there's enormous cultural variation and
it's marvelous and interesting and
obvious to anybody but I think we're
missing the forest from the trees to me
this is like you and I are sitting on a
plane and we look at a hill that's 300
feet and 900 feet and we say those are
very different hills but actually if we
took a step back we would see that we're
on we were on a plateau and one was a
mountain that was ten thousand three
hundred feet and another was a mountain
that was ten thousand nine hundred feet
and actually there there are these much
more deep and fundamental plate tectonic
forces that are creating these two
mountains that are very similar but we
are just focused on the superficial top
so the argument in the book is that
everywhere in the world people have
friendship people love their partners
people cooperate people teach each other
these are fundamental common principles
shared by everyone even though there's
also a lot of variation